Sorry, I am PTSD.
>> Sorry, you have PTSD. I'm Wesley Morris
and this is Cannonball. Today we did
start the fire. We did.
I love lists. I love them. They can
clarify and illuminate and surprise. If
it's a list of greatness, it can
introduce great art to people. It can
reintroduce great art to people. But you
know how lists are. No matter what, they
will cause a scandal. Last spring, the
New York Times magazine, where I work,
they decided to compile this list of the
greatest living American songwriters.
And we sent out hundreds of ballots to
people in and around the music industry
to people like Bonnie Ra, Michelle and
Dia, Cello, George Clinton, Mariah
Carey, and basically their job was to
vote for their favorites. And when the
ballots came back, it was up to us to
figure out what to do with them. So, you
know, for me,
it was like the greatest thing I've ever
been asked to do and the worst thing
I've ever been asked to do. Like, like
what am I supposed to do when Bonnie
Wright submits her list to the greatest
songwriters, not obey her wishes? But
the assignment was to take all those
ballots and then use our own critical
judgment to nail down a list of 30. So I
along with the reporter Joe Koscarelli,
my fellow critics Danielle Smith, Jod
Rosen, John Carmonica, and Lindsay
Zolads, we all hung out in a room,
sequestered, and spent days talking it,
shouting it, singing it all out. Last
week, we published a list, the 30
greatest living American songwriters.
And look, it went out into the world.
Y'all had feelings.
about 6,000 comments have come in so
far, mostly asking, "How could you
POSSIBLY LEAVE OUT SOAND SO?" WELL,
LOOK, I mean, we only had 30 slots to
play with, but you know, we also made
those choices for a reason. So, I'm
inviting two of the folks who were in
the room with me making those decisions,
John Karammonica and Joe Koscarelli, the
host of the podcast, and the editor of
the project, Sasha Weiss, friend of the
show, to talk about the impossible task
we faced and, you know, to confront a
lot of the heartbreak. Yours and
definitely mine.
Oh my god.
>> Oh yeah. Joe Costarelli and John
Karmonica.
Welcome to Cannonball.
>> Go time.
>> It's taking long enough.
>> It's go time.
>> First time.
>> I know.
>> First time, not the last time.
>> Shall it not be your last?
>> First time a go time.
>> Thanks for coming back.
>> Thanks for having me.
>> Um, okay. Just to make everything very
clear about what is happening today.
right now. We participated in the
thinking through and deliberating of the
30 greatest living American songwriters.
Um, you were our
shepherd,
our um,
adjudicator. You're like our our you
helped us adjudicate. Um, and now I just
thought it would be great for you to
like help wrangle us as we sort of think
through this list
>> an impossible
>> and also correct the record.
>> Maybe today we should think about it as
like therapy, you know?
>> I mean, I I can I can play that role.
>> You want to start?
>> Yeah. Well, maybe we should just like go
back to how absurd the thing was that we
asked you to do in a, you know, in a
certain way. like there are a lot of
songwriters in this country and we asked
you to narrow it at first to the minute
number of 25. Um
>> it was hard. It was really hard and
we'll get into that. But I think it's
worth saying that you know now that it's
out in the world I I think it's fair to
say that you guys all stand by the list
that you made. Is that fair to say?
>> I do. I mean I I can say that I stand by
it. I also stand by it with the
understanding that
I mean and we've kind of talked about
this. I accepted the mission as being
helping get what was on these musicians
and music industry people's ballots
onto a list of 25 and then 30 of the
greatest living American songwriters. I
>> I did not understand like that to me was
I did not experience
>> process but that was right but that was
one of the things that came up as we did
this right like
>> I'm like I just want to make sure I mean
not exclusively I understood that there
were decisions to be made
>> at some point but I really
>> wrenches to be thrown into what was
happening in the initial balloting
process. I thought that was actually our
task was how do we complicate what came
back to us in a fairly straightforward
and
>> dare I say expected way.
>> Um I stand by the list. It's not my
list. It's not my list.
>> Our list I stand by that's a great way
to put it list.
>> It's a list.
>> I mean
>> and it's a list that I think is more
interesting than it might have been
because at least my you
>> were there.
>> Yeah. At least my motivation in the room
was how do we complicate this? How do we
make this better and fuller and more fun
to argue over? I for what it's worth,
I feel like I can spiritually stand by
the list, but if I want to trouble the
entire process, I don't think our task
was making a list. I think our task was
expanding and re-examining the notion of
American song craft. That to me was the
root of all the arguments that we made
in that room. to the extent that we
disagreed with each other or to the
extent that we gave grace to each other
uh or to the extent that we agreed with
each other, I feel like everybody in
that room was willing to think
expansively about what songwriting is.
And songwriting is such a peculiar
thing. It has so much baggage. It comes
with attachment to certain communities,
certain subg genres, um, and
engaged fans, which I know we'll talk
about later, who have an extremely fixed
idea of what constitutes songcraft.
>> And what do you think that idea is? I
think it's a heroic white man with a
guitar struggling through his emotions
sitting in a room, no collaborators, no
contact with the outside world, perhaps
alcohol, perhaps drugs, accessing some
kind of pure emotional truth and putting
it in a rock country or otherwise roots
affiliated genre folk. Sure.
>> Singer songwriter.
>> Yes. Um, to me, as much as I enjoy some
of that music, I do not mistake that for
the totality of American song. I do not
mistake that for the best examples of
song craft. And what I was grateful for
in the room is that every person in
their way with their uh uh their own
personal frameworks that they came in
the room with was willing to say, "It's
not that. It's not not that, but it's
not only that." and maybe not only
willing but I think collectively seeing
that as the task and and maybe just
returning to the idea of like what you
were doing in the room and kind of how
it all came together, right? Like let's
start with people who you came into that
room passionately wanting to ratify on
this list. Maybe you could each like
take a turn at one who you not not who
made it who made it um as a way of kind
of creating the story that you wanted to
tell about an evolution about kind of
multiplicity of song craft.
>> Sure. Uh, I think that it was really
important for me to have like somebody I
loved
like, you know, with my young heart and
my, you know, current heart make it onto
the list.
>> A nice framework.
>> Um, and who I who just so I would say
Fiona Apple was that was a person such
that was such a person.
>> She was on my back.
>> She's on the list. Uh, I definitely
wanted her to be on one of the one of
the 30 people and I thought it would be
easy to get her there.
>> Wasn't it?
>> I recall it as easy.
>> No. No. We really talked about it.
>> I don't think it was.
>> It wasn't a ton of resistance.
>> It wasn't a ton of resistance, but I
mean I thought it would just be a
forego. You
>> thought it was first ballot?
>> Yeah, I thought she would be a first
ballot.
>> What were some of the challenges of
getting her on?
>> Uh, well, I mean I mean I'll speak for
John here. John John felt like there was
some catalog catalog weakness
>> um weakness is
>> insufficiency
longevity
>> 56 songs 56 songs is not enough
>> I'm just compared to a lot of the people
who were
>> in the same rough buckets I think
ultimately we started to see people in
buckets
>> who is representing this kind of music
or idea
>> mode of songwriting uh generation uh
intervention sensibility and so I think
for whatever reason on the day and and
it should be said
>> we did this on a lot of days
>> it took more days than planned
>> it took three plus days to do it
>> I also can I can I also can I also
>> I had a perverse thought on the way in
today as I was stuck on the train
>> you want to do it all over again
>> no we didn't spend enough time arguing.
>> No, we didn't spend enough time with
that. I agree with that because because
the thing we had to skip over was
listening to music together. We were all
trusting each other's historical memory
and research.
>> Listening. We weren't there saying this
person should be on this list because
listen to this bridge from this deep cut
on their seventh most popular album.
>> We did do we did perform.
>> We short-handed that. We did perform
some things in the room, but it was it
was not
>> there was some karaoke. It was not as
orderly a process and because of that I
think certain aspects of it fell through
the cracks and truly I feel
>> having lived with the final result for a
few days now and seeing the feedback and
absorbing like my main feeling is we
didn't go hard enough
>> which is in terms of what the delivery
did a different list
>> I think yes only on the margin
>> yeah maybe under five let's go back
Wonderful. Also, y'all should have let
me have 33 just for the record.
>> Can Can we say I think it is worth
saying just quickly procedurally so
everybody understands
>> we started with 25 and part of what
emerged I think is
>> that there was no way out of there was
no way to get out of this room without
expanding the parameters a little bit.
>> And most important victory was pushing
for you guys 30 and we pushed for more.
That's right. It's a good way to
>> Did you walk in the room thinking this
person's going to be on the list or I'm
not walking out of here?
>> Oh. Oh. Well, so I mean so many people
that didn't make the list. Obviously the
one that did.
>> Yeah. Um I mean I know that you're
asking for one name, but the answer
there's two names. Wesley,
>> sorry, but there's two names because
they they frame two different conundrums
of list making. The obvious name is the
man on the cover of this issue. One of
three covers.
>> That's Jay-Z Sean Carter.
>> If you do not think that this is one of
the greatest living American
songwriters, you do not listen to
American songs.
>> Yeah.
>> You do not understand contemporary
songwriting, you do not grasp the
importance of rap as style, structure,
narrative, flare, um, attitude. I mean,
I could go on for days. Storytelling.
>> Yeah. Um, but I never actually thought
I'd have to fight that hard to get Jay-Z
on the list.
>> Indeed, you didn't have to.
>> Didn't have to. Great.
The real answer is Romeo Santos.
>> Mhm.
>> That's the real answer.
>> I knew that I had an uphill battle
because I felt fairly confident that no
one else in the room listens to Bata the
way that I listen to Bajhata or even
most contemporary Spanish language
music. Um, even within the framework of
contemporary Latin pop, this is a person
who has carved out a path that has
largely resisted what we have thought of
as crossover. So there was a high chance
that even his most successful records
would be obscure even to my best friends
in the room.
>> Mhm. I mean,
>> and so I had to make an argument.
>> I live in New York City. I mean I mean
all literally
>> this was not this was not a no. This is
also one of those things where like I
was hoping that Romeo Santos would be
>> we could have a beneficiary of that and
moved on to said and said the Latin box
is checked or one could have
but this is where you have to bring to
bear what is the reason that I am a
music critic. What is the reason that I
am a music critic at the New York Times?
What is the function of my job? And part
of that is saying that Jay-Z matters as
much as Bob Dylan as much as Romeo
Santos. And for me, I don't know that I
would have quit my job if Romeo Santos
didn't make the final list, but it was
the case that I felt that I had to make
most forcefully. And I feel grateful
that that was a success.
>> Mhm. What about you, Joe? I want I want
to hear who it is for you.
>> I'm not going to say Taylor Swift.
>> We've talked enough about Taylor Swift.
I will always knew she would end up on
the list,
>> but Taylor I mean, we didn't we didn't
talk about Taylor Swift. I mean, it was
>> there was push back maybe initially if I
remember correctly.
>> Talking about LeBron a lot,
>> but it was like it was going to get it
was going to get steamrolled. I knew,
you know, I knew based on the the name
Yeah. that like
>> that was going to happen.
>> I think Outcast really, really, really
needed to be on this list. I think they
are perhaps the greatest bridge
between all of the songwriters on this
list. I would maybe put them in like the
center of this universe in terms of
>> especially black American music,
>> southern music, storytelling tradition,
experimentalism. I think like we forget
how crazy Outcast music is and how
it might have come from George Clinton
and Parliament Funkadelic and also UGK
and there's the ghost of Prince in this
like
>> you talk about depth of catalog with
someone like Fiona.
>> I think people made this list in
different ways. Some people made this
list because they have five undeniable
everybody knows this song. This is as
sturdy as it gets. You know, I'm
thinking of Diane Warren. Like Diane
Warren does not have that deep of a
catalog, but the high
literally
compared to what are some of the people
who have
>> deep in quality or deep in like
quantitatively
>> quantity. She doesn't you you're not
writing for like a random Diane Warren
album.
>> No, but you're talking about she doesn't
cover breath and depth. Yes. I'm saying
she made it based on the strength of her
10 biggest songs.
>> It's like there's like 50 songs we're
talking about, Joe.
>> All right. Wow. Wow.
>> All right. You still some people made
it. A lot of these people have not
written a good song in 20 30
>> which was really important to you. That
was really important to you.
>> I as among the youngest people in the
room like it was just factual. It was
important to me that there was
contemporary representation on the list
>> and yet Outcast not a lot of songs, huge
big songs that would be worthwhile for
this project in the last 20 years. But
to me, Outcast would have made it if
they just had Spotty Dopalicious, Bombs
Over Baghdad, and Miss Jackson. But you
could do that
10, 20, 50 times in their catalog. just
pick three random songs and be like they
would have made this list only based on
those three songs and they produced
them.
>> So some of it's about just like the
sheer quality of the song that you
>> How high are the highs?
>> How high are the highs? Some of it's
about um you know being like at the
beginning of a lineage or or sometimes
an inheritor of a lineage or furthering
furthering of a lineage. You know, I
like I guess it's just I want to pause
for a second to just think about the
different ways we define greatness
because of course in some ways it's an
absurd claim. 30 greatest, right? But
what are we claiming for these people?
And I think there are a few different
claims. So we've gotten into some of
them, but I want to hear you guys say
like, you know, when you're talking
about Fiona, is she the greatest
songwriter? Does she represent
something? Is it both? I think I mean I
think with Fiona Apple I mean it is a
deeply personal choice but I think part
of the reason it's so personal for me is
because I mean there are very few
artists that
are expressing something that feels like
it should not be expressed in song that
comes from some profoundly
visceral place
>> that is given lyrics and a sound
musically that matches the emotional
instability that is that is
the subject of a lot of her songs. I
think there's so much risk in the
emotional dimension and I think the risk
is married to some really unusual and
groundbreaking sounds that she is
clearly the steward of because she's
working with different producers from
album to album to album
>> and also over time like came over 30
years
x amount of years off came back hit a
grand slam in the in the World Series.
>> Right.
like it was unlike Outcast doesn't have
10 or 20 criminals. She doesn't have 10
or 20 songs that everyone that's like
tattooed onto our brains and hearts and
that people could sing a karaoke and
whatever. It's a that to me is a much
more that's a breath and depth of
catalog pick. And I think that we wanted
to acknowledge as many songwriting
traditions as possible. Most of them are
that big bucket we talked about, singer,
songwriter. Most of these artists on
this list are performers. I think that
that's like one of the biases that both
the voters and ultimately us shared
which is that it's easier for us to
appreciate songwriters who are also
performers or in the case of someone
like the dream who was someone that I
wrote about for this his songs for other
people are buoied by the fact that he
also has solo work and so you can draw
the line between the two you can be like
oh that's him in that Beyonce or Rihanna
song which I know because I've also
listened to his albums.
>> Also, I would to pick up on the the
performer problem here.
>> Like, and to go back to this sort of
perverse idea that we didn't argue
enough, like I feel like we should have
had a day that was only about
non-performing songwriters.
>> Yeah.
>> Um cuz those cases are harder to make. A
lot of those people work within niches
or I mean not like Nashville is a niche,
but like it's
also a way of working.
>> Yeah. and we and we put Randy Clark and
Jane Mali on the list,
>> Josh Osborne.
>> Um, but to me, I I think when I take a
step back and think what's not right
with this list,
I think could use a couple more
non-performing songwriters. Not enough
people for whom all they do every day is
wake up and think about how to write a
song, regardless of the tradition that
they write a song in.
>> Okay, this is a good segue to
heartbreaks and
disappointments. You
>> can't break my heart, Sasha.
>> It's not possible.
>> I You're Yeah,
>> I have regrets.
>> Regrets. Regrets.
>> Regrets.
>> Do you want to talk about my regret that
dovetales with the Canadian problem or
do you want to save the Canadian
problem?
>> Let's go for the Canadian problem.
>> I think a lot of people have Joanie
Mitchell regrets. The Joanie Mitchell
regret
>> among us.
>> Yeah. And among the people who have
received the list. Uh, and I think the
Joanie Mitchell regret for me dovetales
with the fact that Drake is not on this
list. Drake is among the top five most
important songwriters, no nationality
attached of the 21st century.
>> Oh, I thought you say of all time. Of
all time.
>> I'm not ready to go there at this moment
right now.
>> Of all time.
>> And the argument for Joanie was yes, she
was born in Canada, but she made
Americanness a huge part of her career.
her art. And my counterargument was
Drake is half American. He is a black
southern American. His father is a black
southern American. He spent as much time
in America probably in his adult in his
adult life as anyone else. And just
because he is associated in popular
culture so closely with Canadianness,
which not many artists are, certainly
ones that have crossed over, and that's
a big point of pride for him and his
career and his songwriting, but I would
argue that perhaps slightly more subtly,
he has just as closely aligned himself
with the American South. His
>> uncle taught Prince how to play some
music. You know, it's like there there
is a deep lineage of American
songwriting. I think ultimately we
decided that was a slippery slope. If
how do you define Americanness, right?
Like then is Neil Young on the list
because obviously he is an American
songwriter in some way too,
>> right? Or Bloodis or all kinds of many
many people down the line. So that was
more on a technicality.
Um my other related regret is
that we didn't talk about future enough.
Yeah,
>> I think we knew we wanted contemporary
rap representation. We have a nice
lineage of rappers in this project,
right? We have super super lyrical pento
paper. Kendrick Lamar is on here. That's
he's a very he's a classicist. We have
Jay-Z, who is a classicist, but who
broke the form by stopping writing,
>> which led to other people, other rappers
no longer putting pen to paper and
freestyling in real time on the mic.
Outcast also classicists and
experimentalists at once, dedicated
writers of lyrics,
>> for the postmodern rappers,
>> we we put Young Thug.
>> He's our postructuralist.
>> He's our postructuralist rapper.
Young Thug is great. Future is a better
songwriter than Young Thug to me. You
can argue with me. Give me Let me
finish. This is
>> This is This is what happened in the
room.
>> Yeah. Because
Future is an R&B singer. Future has
written songs for other people. Future
started the melody that became Drunken
Love by Beyond Feel No Way by Drake. got
more musical modes than so many other
>> is also an amazing lyricist. On top of
that, I think when it comes to song
craft, as much as I love Young Thug and
what he represents, I think Future is a
more of a songwriter and even in this
postmodern mode and also we skipped over
Lil Wayne
>> who is the who is the godfather to all
of the people. you're raising really in
this postmodern
almost post structuralist question about
>> young thug not even versus future but
what he represents is like the the other
ancillary question is not what
songwriting is but what is a song right
and and I think it's incredibly
important to talk about why young thug
is on the list
>> sure
>> I don't want to hit him against future
specifically because I would have been
perfectly thrilled to have both of them
on the list
>> but we knew we didn't have a slot and
obviously Lil Wayne as well
>> 2010's Atlanta rappers.
>> So
I feel like a lot of people who think
about the arc of songwriting start at
the beginning. Whatever the beginning
is. Is it the ' 50s? Is it the 20s? Is
it the 1870s? Whatever they're starting
from there.
When I was thinking about Young Thug, I
was starting from today,
>> right?
>> And working backwards. And I was
thinking, what does rap music sound like
today? It's chaotic. It's broken. It's
ruptured. It's nonlinear.
Uh it is improvisational.
And who is a person, not the only
person, but who is a primary person
responsible for that? I think much of
what you hear is pretty much traceable
to Young Thug's mixtape run in the
mid2010s.
>> Sure. So, to me, I'm thinking as we're
splitting buckets up and as we're
thinking about what stories do we want
to tell here, I want to tell a story
about a genre that started with an
ambivalent relationship to melody, with
an ambivalent relationship to structure,
with rappers rapping for eight minutes
with no rhyme, with no structure, no no
choruses, and then choruses imposed, and
then choruses becoming one with the
verse, and melody becoming one with
rhythm.
And then all of that
>> on the other other side.
>> And now we are on the other side of
that.
>> And if you talk to any 23-year-old at
the Osama Son show and ask them what
their most important songs are that they
care about, I promise all those songs
sound like Children of Young Thug.
>> And so to me, I can tell a story with
Young Thug that I can't exactly tell the
future. Doesn't mean they're both not
deserving to be on the list, but in the
sense that we had Yeah. In the sense
that we had to split them. To me,
>> Thug was a clearer path to telling that
part of the story.
>> I love that Thug is on this list. I
would have put Great, too.
>> Yeah. Great photo.
>> I would have obviously Yeah. Just
personal biases. It's If it's my list, I
put five or 10 southern rappers on the
list.
>> Yeah. Okay. More heartbreaks. Uh, I have
a list of I made a list. Um, we don't
have to I'm I don't we don't have to run
them all down
>> rejudicate them, but some of these
people came up in the room, some of them
didn't. You know, my number I made two
cases
>> in the room.
>> Just do it
>> form.
>> Oh, I thought you were going to say the
other one.
>> Uh, what was the other case? Oh, Erica
Badu. Oh, no.
>> You made more than two.
>> I made I tried every day.
>> That one almost broke. I actually would
say that many of these meetings were
just simply us watching Wesley make the
case for Erica Badu
>> beautifully. It should be
>> andable case
>> and compellingly like no no qualms with
the case.
>> She could have she could have
>> could have been on the list could have
been on.
>> We could have we could have gotten rid
of the 30 on the list, done a whole
different list with 30 different people
>> and we would have been happy with it. I
think
>> yes. But go ahead.
>> Anyway, I I'll just do the list. I mean
I will just say really quickly about
Erica Badu. I just feel like
the thing that she does is so is really
singular because initially it seemed
like she was resurrect, you know, she's
part of this Neo soul situation and
she's resurrecting all these dormant
sounds and you know, we're sick of
hip-hop. We don't want to hear any
hip-hop in our in our R&B. Get it out.
And like there were these people who
were
stamped as being responsible for like
redirecting R&B to a more pure place
which was a total mischaracteration
mischaracterization of her priorities
where she was coming from um
>> who she was in the room with making that
music
>> what her who her collaborators were. But
she's such a singular
imagination
of of song craft that is still
like satisfying and delicious and weird
and funny but also deeply connected.
this the the the the
path from the studio to the street is
like very direct with her, but she she's
just so funny and she's so
her hooks I mean I don't even is a does
does everybody have to know a hook for
it to be hook? I'm hooked, right? Um you
look at a song like Danger.
>> I mean
>> I can't believe this has just turned
into us listening to Wesley make the
case for Eric. This is true. I am PTSD.
Sorry. I PTSD.
>> I just You have PTSD.
>> I have PTSD.
>> You can't I've got more PTSD than you
have when it comes to this lady.
>> All right. Let's not PTSD contest.
>> All right. All right. All right. All
right. All right.
>> Yeah. Sasha wins. Sasha wins.
>> So fair. I mean, sorry. That is fair.
Sasha PTS.
>> I actually don't have any. I'm driving.
>> Uhm. I made multiple cases for both
those artists. Um, Randy Newman.
>> Randy Newman. Really close. Really
close. And I tried and I tried.
>> Um,
>> Lyn Manuel Miranda. We didn't I mean I
>> Yeah, I thought I thought a lot about
this. I
>> Yes, like like a Universal regret.
>> No, no, Joe. I think Jose
>> Well, I as I said as I said to Sasha
before we started recording, I had not
yet reached the stage of life where the
Moana soundtrack was part of it. But in
the eight plus months
>> since we did this.
>> Oh my god, I learned something today.
>> Yeah. So, you know, Joe loves musical
theater. I did not know. My daughter
loves the song Perfect Daughter even
though she has not seen Moana.
>> Yeah. I mean,
>> um Wow.
>> James Murphy.
>> James James.
Cool guy.
>> James Murphy. Carly Simon. Jimmy Webb.
Uh Billy Isish and Phineas. Jillian
Welch.
>> Yeah.
>> Talked about her. We talked about her a
lot.
>> She did not she did not make the list.
Patty Griffin didn't even come up, but
she got she was well balloted.
>> Um and Donald Fagan,
>> which is a real real flash point in the
room.
>> Also, just it's important to
>> I will just what? Go on. Are you going
to say what I'm going to say?
>> No. I I would never. And
>> say no, no, it could never. No, no,
please. I insist. I just I was really
fascinated by the racial breakdown of
the Donald Fagan fight because the
Negroes in the room were in favor
>> and the white men were not.
>> The white There was a white woman who
was give Lindsay her flowers as a Steely
Dan head.
>> I was a hard no on Steely Dan in the
same way I was a hard no on Billy Joel.
>> Email me, bro.
>> We'll talk about Billy Joel and another
major artist in a in a job in the room.
I took my job in the room to be
>> keeping off Dan off the list
>> to keep a certain kind of
>> guy
>> guy guy guy guy guy guy guy guy guy guy
guy guy guy guy guy guy guy guy guy guy
guy
>> off in favor
in favor of
>> just a guy
>> you know guy when you see him
>> you know the guy when you hear me I know
the guy I mean I know I know the guy
when I see him
is Not that guy.
>> I'm just saying everybody who's watching
knows that guy. That's all I'm saying.
>> You want to talk about We can talk about
Beck and being that guy. But I mean,
>> no votes for Beck. Sorry. Can Okay. Can
I just in the interest of of expediting?
>> We want you.
>> No. No. I just can I
want to read
>> and Bill Callahan. Now I'm done.
>> Say a couple more.
>> Bill Callahan.
>> Jesus Christ. Your whole ballot.
>> You couldn't have balanced down the
words.
NO, I CAN'T.
>> THAT WASN'T ON YOUR BALLOT.
>> I'M NO, I'm just talking about
>> I should do homework to have new people
who
keep going
with Do you see what I was like, go,
please.
>> Literally, I'm too busy looking at the
camera.
>> Katie Crunchfield. Fine. Okay, we'll
pick up almost. She really almost
>> on the bubble. Maybe we tried.
>> Yeah. Okay. Nas
>> Styles P.
>> Mhm.
>> Whose ballot is online. Go check that
out.
>> Hillary Lindsay,
>> Zack Bryan, Earl Sweatshirt, Lil Wayne,
Allan Jackson,
>> Luke Leairard,
Cameron,
Ashley Gorley, Sturgil Simpson,
Scarface, Katie Crutchfield, and then I
said didn't put Pete Wentz, but I should
have. We can go on now.
>> Can I say Can I do 30 seconds on the
Kanye and Beyonce problem? Sure.
Sure. Maybe we should do that.
>> Those are first of all, those are non
over they're overlapping, but to me
they're the same problem.
>> Hold on, Joe. I think what we should
probably do is, you know,
>> feedback.
>> No, we'll just talk about what it has
been like to have this thing be in the
world, including receiving a lot of
comments from, you know, thousands of
comments from readers.
>> Thousands and thousands. Shout out to
you all.
>> And a lot of typing. um to think about
like some more about what it what it
what this list is actually saying and
doing in meaning even in terms of like
the way we've been talking about who's
not on it.
>> Yep. Okay. So, let me read a comment
from and don't worry, you'll all get to
read comments too, but I'm going to read
the first one. Dan W from Los Angeles
says, "Rather than argue the impossible
task of sorting by superlatives, I will
only ask the following. What constitutes
writing a song? Which part of the
songwriting are you judging? the lyrics,
the music, the production behind the
recording. I just think this is a fool's
errand trying to express the best when
one song can be played on a ukulele and
sung while another needs a team of
producers creating a big
comment. I love this.
>> You're comparing apples to TR 808s.
They're all valid songwriters, but songs
aren't just one thing. I am happy to see
Steven Merritt's name on any list,
though.
>> Thank you.
>> So, that person made a choice. Wow,
>> what a twist to be I did not see that
coming.
>> Come on. I did like really truly
honestly
>> great plot twist. Okay, so my my thought
>> this man knows what an 808 is.
Wild.
>> Wow. Stephen America does not want to
hear his name associated with 80
anything unless it's 80 songs or one
album.
>> 303s.
>> No. No.
>> Yes. Um,
>> correct.
>> Exactly.
>> No, I love this. I love this comment. I
love this comment.
>> Great. Do you want to come on the next
uh You want to be in the next meeting,
DW?
>> No, I But I think the thing that you
>> The water is warm.
>> What is coming up for me in hearing this
comment is
>> it's a cold plunge.
>> It's the coldest
>> or it's a boiling It's a boiling
cauldron.
>> Oh, there you go. Um,
>> I love this comment because
what I immediately thought of is he's
describing the many ways in which a song
can ex be expressed, right? The modes it
can take, the devices and instruments
uses to used to create a song, the
places, the sources of inspiration.
The thing that I liked coming back to
when we talked about who was going like
who should or should not be on this
list, a thing that I liked thinking
about and I think we talked about it
quite a bit uh and this is a sort of
traditionalist way of thinking about
like a kind of song craft excellence but
I think it's a useful one which is
covers
>> right like how are these songs being
whose songs are being covered sampled
covered sampled and
>> song of karaoke I would add to that
>> and also you know which is a cover in
the form of like the people's the
people's cover
>> um I actually think that it's not quite
a fool's errand because
>> I think there is something
sort of quantifiable in some way I just
I like thinking about the top five vote
getters among the balloters the people
we didn't even talk about in the room
because there was nothing to discuss
because They were going on the list no
matter what. Bob Dylan, Stevie Wonder,
Carol King, D, Dolly Parton, and Paul
Simon.
>> Foundational bricks. Like, like I would
argue ultimately that there are people
who were not in the top hundred of
balloting who are just as essential to
have on this list in a variety of ways,
but the balloting is obviously going to
overindex on older artists and artists
uh who are perceived as foundational.
So, you know, like I'm interested in
this idea that you have of kind of how
is a song traveling through the world
and what does that tell us about its
sturdiness? But I also think that it's a
bit of a misread. Covers have a huge
tradition, say, in country music and
less of a tradition in rap music. So,
you can't
different ways. I I understand. But I'm
saying that that is one karaoke is an
interesting idea. What do people want to
go and sing? I know you're a big karaoke
guy. What do you go in the room and want
to sing and like sing or wrap your heart
out to?
>> I Wesley am a big karaoke guy. I mean I
also know you don't do it at all.
>> I feel like
>> it's an ab
never in my brain. I have seen you.
>> You know what my version of karaoke
karaoke should be banned. I'm sorry.
>> Sorry. Don't do it.
>> What?
>> Don't do it. John, get off the show. You
gotta leave.
>> I have a more literal answer to this
question though, at least in terms of
how I thought about it, which is it is
somehow the combination between lyrics
and music and melody. And if you are
involved in any part of that process,
especially at the germ of an idea level,
I'm willing to put
>> primarily a producer on the list. for
instance, you know, Jimmy and Terry and
Nyall. I think of more as
>> Oh, and a name that came up more as I
think of those people more as producers
than as songwriters
>> because they often work with a lyric
writer or a melody writer in addition,
but I'm I was willing to go there. My
definition for songwriting included
producers primarily. It included a
topliner, someone like the dream who
does not write music typically, but who
adds the melody over a track, just the
lyrics and the melody. Maybe the lyrics
are then iterated on later. Where I
couldn't go was people who come in later
in the process or are primarily
curators, collage artists, executive
producers.
>> This is a really good segue to one of
the people that has come up a lot in the
comments. I think we should talk about
her. Joe, can you read this comment from
Craig?
>> So, this is Craig.
Craig wrote, "Beyonce left off because
did her style of parenthesis genius
collaborative songwriting count her out.
>> Her last three albums, Lemonade,
Renaissance, and Cowboy Carter are genre
bending American classics." Referencing
American Reququum at this point would
seem appropriate. Be interested in the
thought process of the judges, please.
Period. Those old ideas
>> I can tell you mine
>> buried here.
>> Yeah.
>> I think of Beyonce as a curator and an
executive producer. I have heard
>> and performer
>> and performer. The performer like the
performer.
>> The performer of the Yes.
>> of the moment.
>> I agree with most of this comment. I
think I've heard
demos that Beyonce is saying. I see what
she adds to them. She is Frank Sinatra.
She is Frank Sinatra plus Quincy Jones
plus Kanye West. Another person I would
put in this camp. Kanye West famously,
infamously uses ghostriters, uses ghost
producers.
>> He is the magician who can put all that
stuff together. He can record a session
with Justin Vernon, a session with Chief
Keef, a Mike Dean guitar solo, put it
all together. He is the maestro. He's a
modern-day composer. I'm open to the
argument that that's another sort of
postmodern songwriting, but that would
have been expanding the definition for
me one click further, and we didn't take
it there.
>> And that's also like a very
performercoded
thinking about songwriting. Um, uh,
I I disagree with you about the exact
overlap between Beyonce and Kanye. I
think especially if you go to earlier
Kanye, I think obviously what we're
saying about later Kanye, that's
indisputable. Earlier, it's up for
debate.
>> Uh consequence
songs,
>> right?
>> Whatever we know about Kanye 4.0, it
might have been different during Kanye
1.0, Beyonce as well, similar thing.
>> Although there was the early stuff where
>> I think it's the opposite actually where
she
>> I'm going to moderate. Sorry,
we got to stay on track here.
>> Hands off the debate versus happen
later. We're going to go to another
person oftentioned by the commenters.
You're going to love this one. This is
for you, John.
>> James says, "I went to Berkeley College
of Music.
>> I didn't." Uh, and there was an entire
songwriting curriculum based on Billy
Joel songwriting. It's literally stupid
he's not on this list. It's like not
This is great. I I wish I'd seen this. I
would have responded to this comment.
You still can.
>> Uh I am about to. It's like not having
Hrix or Eddie Van Halen on a list of
greatest guitarists.
Okay. It's not
It's actually not like that. Uh thank
you for this opportunity to respond to
this comment to which I do respectfully.
Uh when you think about Hrix and Eddie
Van Halen, you think about formal
innovators who are also in their way
hitmakers and creators of melodies and
also processes that are universal in how
they have moved through the world in
their wake. Billy Joel is a very good
example of a person who writes one or
1.5 kinds of songs really well that also
people before him wrote really well and
people after him wrote really well. I
love that I'm delivering this to camera.
This is I'm really going in. We're
>> clipping this.
>> No. No. Yeah, we're really going in.
>> I like Billy Joel. I just want to go on
the record and say I like Billy Joel. I
know you don't like Billy Joel. I like
Billy Joel. People I love like Billy
Joel. But if we are making a list of 30
greatest living American songwriters,
you're not only saying what are they
great at, you're saying what aren't they
doing? What is a thing why? What is the
reason I wouldn't put them on this list?
And Billy Joel exists in pre-existing
traditions. He's good at it. Some days I
think great, but
you had to got to draw the line
somewhere.
>> I don't know. I mean, I guess I I always
sort of I think the thing that gets me
out of a lot of this is like, you know,
there were only 30 there only 30 slots,
but I was convinced when we walked into
that room that we'd be walking out with
Billy Joel being on the list
>> and our readership would have
>> very convinced. I just think that he the
song craft his songs don't sound like
anybody else's songs. What you hear in
the songs is tradition, right? These are
original songs that like come from him
and his sensibility is guiding every one
of the story songs.
>> Every one of the breakup songs, fall in
love songs. The traditions he's drawing
from are quite clearly drawn from a
tradition, but they're not to be
mistaken for anybody else's song. And I
think that each one of those numbers
exists on its own. And I said numbers
because, you know, the joke about Billy
Joel is he's just Broadway without a
show.
>> Yeah.
>> I don't know. I don't want to belabor
the Billy Joel point. I just want to
acknowledge all the people who were as
bewildered as I was disappointed that he
that we left that room and he was on the
floor.
>> Okay.
>> Um Yes. Okay. Sorry.
>> No, it's okay. No, I'm glad that we
aired that out. That was important. One
more person who you know.
>> Wow. It's like you knew who to give each
comment to.
>> There's a reason I'm the moderator, my
friend.
>> K. Colette from Canada. Love her or
something else. Taylor Swift absolutely
deserves her spot on the list. She
reminds me of someone else who was
conspicuously absent. Madonna.
>> Madonna. Madonna. Madonna. Wow.
>> Yes, she wrote Lucky Star and Like a
Prayer, but what about the gorgeous Live
to Tell, oh Father, Frozen, Deeper and
Deeper, Justify My Love, four minutes in
all she wrote or co-wrote most of her
catalog
like like Taylor Swift, I don't think
Madonna is ever taken seriously or given
enough credit for her songwriting. I
will not read the rest of this comment
because it involves The National. Um,
>> not a lot of indie rock on this list.
Um, I will say I share K. Klette's
observation.
>> Sure.
>> Um, I think Madonna is
the most underrated
a lot of things
>> still to this day. I mean,
>> ubiquitous to be properly properly.
>> We're talk the way you talked about
Outcast. I mean,
>> no, it all applies to Madonna. Yeah.
>> Molecular. Madonna is an essentially
molecular
>> entity at this point. She has all the
lessons have been learned. All of the
cultural meaning has been absorbed. She
is in everybody's DNA. Whether you make
music or do something else,
construction, she's in you.
And I think that it's so easy to take
her, oh my god, she's the person that's
going to make me start crying. No,
>> wait. This is a But this is
>> I just feel like saying
>> I, you know, because part of her never
being taken seriously is that she was so
good at never letting the seams show.
>> She was never a person who was ever out
here being like, "Look what I did. Look
what I can do." She just did it. To that
point, can I do the literal reporter
thing one more time, which is to say I
don't know
>> what Madonna's role in the writing of
her songs is like I I don't know. I I
would have loved to learn.
Okay. So, I have
>> first of all, I do think
>> Mariah Carey who made the list.
>> Yes.
>> Okay. A a couple of things. I think we
did not even entertain Madonna enough.
>> We should have.
>> We should have. That is
>> I would have asked this question in the
room.
>> I am uh bringing us all to the red table
like we did not talk about Madonna
enough. That's on us.
>> We did not across the board.
>> But but here's but I but I have thoughts
about that. I I think I know why or I
have some thoughts about why part of it
is the reason what we did talk about a
lot which is Mariah Carey which is the
persistent perception uncertainty about
how much songwriting contribution
>> that person had.
>> Who is the author of these songs?
>> Sure. And and again we resolved it in
Mariah's favor. Totally fine. We had a
lot of people in the room who had
visibility into different pieces of
Mariah's career. Totally fine. I
actually think the Madonna problem is
slightly different, even though it's
it's in the same bucket. When was
Madonna at her commercial peak? Madonna
was at her commercial peak in the 80s
into the early
>> 2000s.
>> I was going to say early to mid 90s
>> and then and then No, early to mid 90s.
However, I would say uh for the sake of
my argument, let's let's keep my
boundaries here.
Madonna suffered from thriving during an
era where narratives about prefabricated
pop music were starting to form, where
rockism was alive. And also because who
was as famous as Madonna at the same
exact time? Michael Jackson who showed
overemphasized
both greatness and uh uh innovation.
>> He wanted you.
He wanted you to see
>> Madonna was a different kind of pop
star.
>> Also Prince. Also Prince.
>> Yes. Although in the wake very much in
the wake of Prince. But I think if you
are even a casual fan thinking back to
1986 or 1988 or whatever, what you
remember is Michael Jackson being great
and loud and dominant and Madonna being
super popular but not being flashy about
these other things. And I think that
shaped narrative narrativization of that
era of her song craft where she might
have done the most actual writing.
>> Sure. I also think that we're talking
about the difference between what women
do and what men do are how they're
received in the world.
>> This is a point of real neglect. Um, and
I think that well I think but no I think
that one of the healthy things that come
out of a conversation like this is that
I mean and this is what I think is great
about this list which is that it is now
it is one of those things I don't know I
never really know what it means when
people say well it's going to force all
these conversations but I mean it really
is among you know people in my life you
know us here right now talking about
what I mean in this in the particular
case of Mad Donna, what authorship is
and what it looks like, right? I have a
I have always been a big believer in the
singer being as much an author of a song
as the person who sat down with like a
pen and a paper or a laptop or whatever
to to do the composition.
>> Sure.
>> And you know, so in that case, you know,
Whitney Houston, Ella Fitzgerald, to me,
they're songwriters.
>> Sure.
>> Um
>> would Whitney have made this list?
Probably not.
>> No, she would not have. And if anything,
>> if Madonna didn't make the list, there's
no way Whitney Houston.
>> And Mariah saying throughout her career,
I am a writer was positioning herself
away from the Whitney Houston problem,
which is she's just a voice.
>> And that was their split among others,
which you've talked about in various
podcasts probably on this very show. But
yes, the the Whitney Mariah question,
one of the things Mariah did to
differentiate herself was continuing to
draw attention to the idea that I am a
writer of these songs. I am an author of
these songs and that makes me better.
>> I mean, Leslie, you were starting to
kind of, you know, synthesize for us
some of the work that this list is doing
in the world. One of one function of
which is to prompt a lot of
conversations about what songwriting is,
what it contains, how broad the
definition should be, how narrow the
definition should be. We figured some of
that out in here, but I guess I want to
hear from all of you like what in the
end in the final in the final analysis
is this list doing you think what is the
work that it's doing in 2026? What do
you think?
uh
we may well be moving towards an era in
which the very notion of song is
troubled and unstable.
I think that's exciting personally. Uh I
think a lot of people
commenting
maybe don't find that exciting. I
personally find it exciting. Um, I'm
perversely happy to see a bunch of
people good at bat for folks that maybe
don't speak to me at that level. Um,
I love music.
I'm great I'm grateful for music. Like
I'm great like I'm grateful to be able
to sit here and have arguments with
people about these things that have
defined like my intellectual and
personal project for the entirety of my
life grimly. Um, and I am grateful that
as a collective that we could come
together and resist the easiest options
and resist the simplest options and
put various traditions in dialogue with
each other and on par with each other.
And I can only hope when people come
along 10, 20, 30 years from now to
annihilate our list, it'll be for good
reason. They'll know what we stood for.
>> I was saying, yeah, I was thinking as
you're saying that, it's like it's a
time capsule. It's like and might be the
last moment that we consider song in
this way where we could still draw the
line from Stevie Wonder to Bad Bunny,
you know, and and maybe the next wave of
these overlapping lineages like looks
totally different uh and is as much
machine as it is man, you know, like I
don't you know,
>> 30 greatest AI songwriters
next year. same time, same place.
>> I Let's do it.
>> I feel like
I think so. I think this is a great
moment to have this list out in the
world.
>> Um I think that it's a great moment to
have this list out in the world because
it is meeting this moment that you're
interested in, which is like the sort of
breakdown of traditional song craft into
not even constituent parts, but scraps,
right? Mhm.
>> And having the scraps sort of be
reconstituted into something
song like
>> right
>> but at the same time if you look at the
charts I've been really interested in
how
you know
the masses of us are really hungry for
or
at least tolerant of a kind of much more
traditional sounding song right now. I
think that there is this wonderful
dialogue happening on the list that
reflects a a I don't even know if it's a
dialogue in the real world, but a
tension between
um comfort and instability.
And
>> that's it. Can I just say I dare someone
to cover Playboy Cardi, Opium Baby on
American Idol. I dare you.
>> Let this be let this be the moment that
sets you free and go follow your truth.
I can't wait to see you all.
>> But I mean, I actually think that
somebody like Don Toiver is
>> I did not expect that name to be said in
this podcast.
>> I'm just saying I I just feel like
>> Sasha, you listen to a lot of Don
Toiver.
>> Me either.
>> Well, I don't know. I just feel like
there are these places where this
tension exists between like the broken
down and the very stable and
traditional. And like what do we what
did we spend the last two years doing?
obsessing over this one white lady's
songs while the meaning of them, the
writing of them while two black men were
having a songwriting fight that we all
were also fascinated by.
>> You're talking about Taylor, Drake, and
Kendrick.
>> Yes.
>> And I I call rap a beef a songwriting
fight
about each other.
>> Anyway, I I I don't know. This just
feels like the ripest time for this list
to go out into the world. And I I I'm
glad that we did it. I'm glad that we
took part in it. And I'm also glad that
you guys came to talk about it.
>> We're great. We're grateful to be here.
>> I learned some things. I felt some
things.
>> This is really fun. We should do it
again.
>> We should do it again. Um listen, thank
you, John. Thank you, Joe. Thank you,
Sasha, for keeping us well behaved.
>> Thank you for not being well behaved and
making this crazy list.
>> Go read the list. Cannonball.